#interim report

#what's the suss

Z-Ursae Majoris (Z UMa) is a late type, semi-regular, circumpolar star (Srb)
within the "belly" of the plough constellation in the N. hemisphere. It has a
magnitude which typically varies by approximately 2 magnitudes, from 7.2 to 
8.9 magnitudes at present and is at a distance of approximately 330pc
from our own solar system. The periodicity of this star is poorly 
defined, with a mean period of approx 195 days  but it shows irregular 
changes in the light curve. It has been suggested that Z UMa 
(and some other SRVs) might be multiply periodic. Z UMa was first 
observed as variable by Dr E.S. King, from the Harvard College Observatory. 

My project is based upon investigating and identifying any periodicities 
present in the star and understanding some of the irregularities 
associated with this star.  

#what's been done

The data being used for the investigation are amateur datasets from the 
AAVSO and AFOEV, which date back to the 1920s. Given that the data on the 
magnitude of the star is almost entirely estimates of the apparent visual
magnitude by eye, cleaning this data to a usable state has taken considerable
time. The visual estimate data was cleaned of entries with insufficient
specificity, and a python script was written to further filter the data by
extreme magnitude limiting, and by the number of entries by each observer,
such that "fairweather" observers' data would not be considered as there was
no measure of its consistency. With the cleaned data, a datetime conversion
script was written, which converted the Julian Day Count of the data to a 
simpler Gregorian calander entry, reindexed and set as datetime data to allow
for easier identification of eras at a glance.

The gregorian format data was run through a python script which calculated
and returned means of the data, both moving averages and fixed averages, 
generally with a 10-day average.

The period of the cleaned data was analysed using a python script
which based upon the Phase Dispersion Minimisation
technique of Stellingwerf (1978)(Fourier Analysis does not handle data 
with many gaps in it well), and a statistical analysis of results was
carried out, yielding only results with a p-value less than 0.05. Although
there was some variation across different eras of data, due to the irregular 
nature of the star, two periods were clearly identified, the fundamental,
with a period of 195.5 days, and the first overtone at 391 days. These 
results are only preliminary however, and more analysis needs to be carried out.

#What's to do
The determined periodicities will still need some further work to ensure their
accuracy and precision are acceptable. There have also been some unusuall deep
minima in 2014, and I plan to investigate spectroscopic data on the star from
the corresponding timespan, and the late 1940s show unusual behaviour in that
the oscillation of the star seems to cease. This too will be investigated. Should
time allow, I would also like to confirm my PDM results with wavelet analysis.
